<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Translator’s Introduction</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="translators-introduction-1" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Translator’s Introduction</h2>
			<p>Heretofore I have withheld from publication such single examples of Zuni folklore as the following, in order that the completer series might be brought forth in the form of an unbroken collection, with ample introductory as well as supplementary chapters, essential to the proper understanding by ourselves of the many distinctively Zuni meanings and conceptions involved in the various allusions with which any one of them teems. Yet, to avoid encumbering the present example with any but the briefest of notes, I must ask leave to refer the reader to the more general yet detailed chapters I have already written in the main, and with which, I have reason to hope, I will ere long be able to present the tales in question. Meanwhile, I would refer likewise to the essay I have recently prepared for the Thirteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, on <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zuni Creation Myths</i> in their relation to primitive dance and other dramaturgic ceremonies.</p>
			<p>Ever one of my chief storytellers was Waíhusiwa⁠—of the priestly kin of Zuni. He had already told me somewhat more than fifty of the folk tales, long and short, of his people, when one night I asked him for “only one more story of the grandfathers.” Wishing to evade me, he replied with more show than sincerity:</p>
			<p>“There is a North, and of it I have told you <i xml:lang="zun">té-la-pʻ-na-we</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a> There is a West; of it also I have told you <i xml:lang="zun">té-la-pʻ-na-we</i>. There are the South and East; of them likewise have I told you <i xml:lang="zun">té-la-pʻ-na-we</i>. Even of the Above have I not but lately told you of the youth who made love to his eagle and dwelt apace in the Sky-world? And of the great World-embracing Waters? You have been told of the hunter who married the Serpent-maiden and journeyed to the Mountain of Sunset. Now, therefore, my word-pouch is as empty as the food-pack of a lost hunter, and⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Feel in the bottom of it, then,” interposed old Pálowahtiwa, who was sitting near, “and tell him of the Underworld.”</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="zun">Hi-ta!</i> [Listen!] brother younger,” said Waíhusiwa, nonplussed but ever ready. “Did you ever hear tell of the people who could not digest, having, forsooth, no proper insides wherewithal to do so? Did you ever hear of them, brother younger?”</p>
			<p>“Nay, never; not even from my own grandfathers,” said I. “<i xml:lang="zun">Sons éso</i> to your story; short be it or long.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a></p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="zun">Sons éso tse-ná!</i>” (“Cool your ‘<i xml:lang="zun">sons éso!</i>’ and wait till <em>I</em> begin.”) <cite>⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. H. C.</abbr></cite></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
